004
FXUS64 KFWD 081814 AAA
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
1214 PM CST Wed Jan 8 2020

.SHORT TERM...
/This afternoon through Thursday/

Even though it is a rain-free day today, the weather is still far
from tranquil. Gusty south and southeast winds will prevail this
afternoon with gusts in the 20-30 mph range. These winds will
help to transport higher moisture into the region tonight and
Thursday, but dry conditions today are resulting in high fire
danger concerns as relative humidity values are in the 20s and
lower 30s across the region. The fire weather concerns will
continue into the early evening hours when temperatures will
start to cool and humidity values will start a quick rise. Higher
humidity values on Thursday, along with cloudy and damp
conditions, will help curtail fire weather concerns tomorrow,
despite breezy winds and warmer temperatures.

We will notice an increase in cloud cover starting later this
afternoon, and then a stratus deck will spread across the region
this evening and tonight as the low level jet increases,
transporting richer low level moisture. Unfortunately, this
stratus deck will persist for much of the day tomorrow; but the
exception to this will be in our western counties where the
clouds will likely break and/or clear Thursday afternoon. Gusty
winds will continue tonight, but should diminish in speed some
tomorrow. Tonight`s overnight lows will be noticeably warmer in
the 50s.

As moisture continues to increase and weak large scale lift
traverses the region tomorrow, areas of drizzle, light rain, and a
few showers will occur. For a good portion of the region, it will
likely be a bleak, cloudy day. The forecast also mentions a
slight chance for thunder in our eastern counties Thursday
afternoon when the forecast soundings indicate the cap may weaken,
but otherwise the cap is expected to hold down convective
potential (including showers) for most of the day. It will be
warmer tomorrow with highs in the upper 60s and lower 70s for most
of North and Central Texas...however, high temperatures in the
mid 60s are forecast along our Red River counties where cloudy and
damp conditions are expected to persist all day.

JLDunn

&&

.AVIATION...
/18Z TAFs/

Concerns: MVFR cigs returning this evening. Drizzle Thursday
morning with an isolated shower also possible on Thursday.

VFR conditions will prevail this afternoon, but the winds will be
gusty to around 25 kts. These gusty winds will continue into
tonight and will be transporting higher low level moisture into
Central and North Texas. As a result, MVFR cigs are expected to
spread across the region this evening and tonight. Timing the cigs
is tricky but have decided to bump the timing up to 03-04Z with
the arrival of a 2-3 kft cloud deck. Closer to daybreak Thursday,
cigs will likely lower to 1-2 kft and should hold there all day on
Thursday. Some models indicate scattered IFR cigs possible
Thursday afternoon but was not confident enough to include that
mention this far in advance.

As ceilings lower early Thursday morning, areas of drizzle are
expected to develop which will likely result in slightly reduced
visibilities also. The drizzle is expected to clear the TAF sites
by midday. An isolated shower may occur near TAF sites during the
day on Thursday, but the overall potential is too low to mention
and have removed VCSH from the TAFs. An isolated thunderstorm
cannot be ruled out late Thursday afternoon, more likely to the
east of the TAF sites, but the cap is expected to suppress nearly
all convective potential during the day.

JLDunn

&&


.LONG TERM... /Issued 422 AM CST Wed Jan 8 2020/
/Thursday Onward/

Friday and Saturday...

A deep upper level trough will be digging through the southern
Rockies on Friday, enhancing deep layer cyclogenesis along a
strong baroclinic region in the Texas Panhandle. The deepening
cyclone will allow for a strong low-level jet to continue through
much of day, enhancing the poleward moisture transport. In fact,
winds between 3,000-4,000 AGL will be racing to the northeast at
60-70 mph. It is this southwesterly competent that will keep a lid
on deep convection for much of the morning and early afternoon. A
few showers and elevated thunderstorms cant be ruled out during
the late morning and into the early afternoon, but with convective
inhibition in place, the likelihood of any strong convection will
be low.

As we get into the afternoon hours, a shortwave will be rounding
the base of the trough and begin making a move through North and
Central Texas. Strong southwesterly winds will likely be ahead of
an approaching cold front that will advance eastward through the
afternoon. Ahead of the line, mixed layer instability will be on
the rise as dynamic cooling enhances the steepening lapse rates.
700-500mb lapse rates on the order of 7.5 to 8 C/km will spread
through much of the eastern half of North and Central Texas while
the thermal inversion weakens and erodes.

There will be two areas that will need to be monitored for
convective initiation, both of which could pose significant
hazards to North and Central Texas residents.

Area #1: The warm sector, generally anywhere east of the I-35
corridor. As the thermal inversion erodes and lapse rates steepen,
convection will have the opportunity to develop ahead of the
approaching cold front. If and when convection develops, updrafts
would have no limitation inhibiting them from reaching their full
potential given the presence of strong effective bulk wind shear
on the order of 60+ kts. Tilted updrafts coexisting with steep
lapse rates would likely yield a large hail and damaging winds
threat. Given the strong southwesterly low level jet in place and
southeasterly winds at the surface, veering winds with height
would also suggest there is a threat of tornadoes from any
supercell that manages to develop in this environment. As
mentioned above, the big question will be if the supercells will
be able to develop.

Area #2: Along the cold front that will be moving swiftly from
west to east Friday afternoon and evening. Strong surface
convergence will allow for a line of thunderstorm to develop along
the I-35 corridor and move eastward through the rest of the day.
Similar to the threats outlined in the warm sector analysis, this
area will be characterized by strong updrafts capable of producing
large hail and damaging winds. Additionally, very strong
unidirectional winds at both the near lower and middle layers of
the atmosphere could enhance the potential for bow echoes to
develop within the main line of thunderstorms. The strong 0-3km
shear vectors would also imply the potential for embedded QLCS
tornadoes, especially the farther east of I-35 you go.

On top of the hazards already mentioned, PWs will have surged to
1.5-1.6 east of the I-35 corridor. To put that in perspective,
that is about 3.5 times more moisture in the atmosphere that what
we usually experience for this time of the year. Given these
values, efficient rain producing showers and thunderstorms will be
capable of dropping a quick 1 to 2+ inches. If a specific area
receives multiple thunderstorms or a persistent line of
thunderstorms, the threat of flash flooding will also increase.
The areas that are most at risk of flash flooding would be east of
a Sherman to Dallas to Corsicana line.

As convection is exiting North and Central Texas, a reinforcing
cold front will be making its way through region and will lead to
winds shifting from the west Friday evening to strong
northwesterly winds by around midnight. Winds behind the cold
front will likely exceed 20 mph and will likely persist through
much of the morning hours Saturday.

The next big question is whether or not there will frozen
precipitation falling from the sky anywhere in the region Saturday
morning. The short answer: maybe. The long answer: probability of
frozen precipitation remains low at this moment but definitely
still possible along and north of US-380. There are still some
uncertainties as to just how far south the main low circulation
will be. Guidance through the day on Tuesday suggested a northward
track, leading to any snow mainly north of the Red River. The 00Z
Euro threw a curve ball with a slightly southward shift in the
track, and although models will continue to wobble back and forth,
the possibility of frozen precipitation cant be discounted
just yet. Additionally, a slew of ensemble members continue to
advertise there is a chance of wintry precipitation, although its
expected to remain light. Given enough ensembles display this
possibility, have introduced a rain/snow mix for those counties
adjacent to the Red River Saturday morning. Once again, if it does
precipitate, it would be very light and no accumulations or
impacts are expected. Of course, given the vigorous system at
play, slight changes to the models can translate to drastic
changes in the precipitation chances and type. Additional details
will become available in the next several days.

Sunday Onward...

Sunday will begin a reprieve from all the active weather the past
several days. Temperatures will remain around seasonal normal for
this time of the year with a light southerly breeze.
Additional rain chances will arrive on Monday as the next
shortwave approaches the region. Any rain chances will remain low
and mainly confined to Central and East Texas. Those rain chances
will linger through the middle of next week as moist air remains
locked generally south of I-20. At the moment, severe weather does
not appear likely.

There is general consensus that a much stronger cold front will
arrive sometime mid to late next week. There are still many small
scale differences in the guidance that could alter the timing of
the front, as well as precipitation chances. For now, will
maintain a dry forecast given cold air advection implies a
subsident airmass. This will continue to be analyzed through the
coming days and any chances will be made if confidence in
precipitation increases.

Hernandez

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    66  55  68  62  73 /   0  10  30  30  80
Waco                67  57  72  62  75 /   0  10  30  10  60
Paris               65  50  64  61  71 /   0  10  40  50  90
Denton              65  54  68  61  72 /   0  10  30  30  80
McKinney            64  53  67  62  72 /   0  10  30  30  90
Dallas              67  56  68  63  73 /   0  10  30  30  90
Terrell             65  54  70  62  73 /   0  10  40  30  80
Corsicana           67  54  71  63  72 /   0  10  30  30  70
Temple              68  56  71  62  74 /   0  10  20  10  40
Mineral Wells       67  53  71  58  72 /   0  10  10  10  50

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

82/37