000
FXUS61 KILN 301526
AFDILN

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Wilmington OH
1026 AM EST Thu Jan 30 2020

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure centered near New England will move off the
Atlantic coast on Friday. An embedded disturbance will move into
the Ohio Valley tonight and Friday, bringing a chance of rain
and snow. The chance of rain and snow will continue into
Saturday as another disturbance moves east across the Great
Lakes.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 PM THIS EVENING/...
A slight bump in temperatures is the primary change in the
forecast this morning. Cloud cover just south of the CWA is
exhibiting erosion from a clear patch over central KY, but this
will be overcome later today by a higher level overcast stratus
deck. Will wait until this potential clearing actually starts
to work into the CWA before jumping on a forecast change to
clear what has been a unusually stubborn stratus deck over the
entire region.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 PM THIS EVENING THROUGH 6 PM FRIDAY/...
Clouds will be on the increase again tonight as another s/wv
digs southeast into the Ohio Valley. Models are now showing a
subtle low level jet developing between 925 mb and 850 mb
late. This will result in weak warm advection/isentropic lift.
Have a chance of rain/snow moving into the Tri-State region
toward morning. Lows will be in the lower 30s.

On Friday, models suggest that the greatest forcing will max out
between mid morning and mid afternoon along and south of the
Ohio River as isentropic lift becomes focused in this region.
Thus, have PoPs ranging from slight chance north to likely along
and south of the Ohio River. Rain and snow can be expected
during the morning with pcpn transitioning over to rain by
afternoon as temperatures warm. A few tenths of slushy snow may
occur along and south of the Ohio River, but overall a half inch
or less. Highs will range from the upper 30s north to the lower
40s south.

&&

.LONG TERM /FRIDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
As we enter February, we can expect above normal temperatures,
and a couple of weather systems giving the potential for
precipitation.

A disturbance dropping southeast through the Great Lakes may
produce some light precipitation Friday night and Saturday. Rain
mixing with snow is the expected weather type in an environment
that will only be marginally cold enough for wintry precip.

This weak system will be followed by a large ridge aloft, and
associated surface high pressure. No precipitation is forecast
for Sunday and Monday in the moisture starved environment.

As the upper ridge translates eastward, a moist southwest flow
will develop into the Ohio Valley near a surface low, bringing
the likelihood for rain Monday night and Tuesday. Some snow may
mix in Wednesday as colder air filters in toward the end of the
event behind the departing low and associated cold front.

Temperatures probably staying above normal through the period
will show notable day to day variance with respect to weather
systems. After highs rise mainly into the 40s on Saturday,
readings will reach the 50s by Monday and Tuesday due to warm
advection on the southwest flow between the high and low. A
retreat back to the 30s and 40s is forecast for Wednesday in
cold advection behind the low.

&&

.AVIATION /16Z THURSDAY THROUGH MONDAY/...
A weak disturbance will move across the region into the first
part of Thursday morning. Stratocumulus clouds will remain
trapped under an inversion. Ceilings will range from 2800 to
3500 ft AGL. By this afternoon, diurnal heating should lift all
ceilings into the 3500 to 4500 foot range. Some breaks in the
cloud cover are possible, but there is low confidence at this
time to clear skies beyond broken at this time.

For tonight, more embedded energy is forecast to dig east into
the Ohio Valley. Models suggest that low level forcing/WAA
advection may develop pcpn to the southwest of the KCVG/KLUK
terminals after 06Z. This pcpn is then forecast to move into
the vicinity of KCVG/KLUK around 12Z and over the sites by 15Z.
Precipitation is likely to be rain and snow. MVFR/IFR ceilings
and visibilities are forecast to accompany the precipitation.

OUTLOOK... MVFR/IFR ceilings and visibilities likely Friday
into Friday evening. MVFR ceilings Saturday into Saturday night.

&&

.ILN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
OH...None.
KY...None.
IN...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Hickman
NEAR TERM...Franks
SHORT TERM...Hickman
LONG TERM...Coniglio
AVIATION...Campbell/Hickman
