000
FXUS61 KILN 041755
AFDILN

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Wilmington OH
1255 PM EST Tue Feb 4 2020

.SYNOPSIS...
A slow moving frontal boundary enhanced by waves of low
pressure is forecast to produce several rounds of precipitation
through the work week into Saturday. High pressure and dry
weather are expected for Sunday.

&&

.UPDATE...

Made minor changes to near term PoPs (increased to 100) as
current radar trends show a persistent rain band stretching
across the Ohio River. Rainfall amounts have been fairly light
across the area with amounts generally a tenth of an inch or
less.

Cold front advancing from the northwest is now moving into the
far NW portions of the forecast area with Lima, OH observing
winds shifting out of the north as of the most recent
observation. Timing of the cold front through the rest of the
area remains on track with temperatures dropping quickly into
the 30s behind the front through the evening.

Concern then switches to the potential for wintry mixed
precipitation across the north late this evening. Current
expectations are on track with only light precipitation
remaining as the primary wave shifts northeast. Fortunately,
current road temperatures continue to look optimistic (lower
50s) so doubt advisories will be needed. Will continue to
monitor precipitation coverage and road temperatures throughout
the afternoon as the cold front shifts southward and
temperatures drop.

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
We have a slow moving front aligned SW-NE along the forward
flank of a long wave upper trough. The boundary is being
enhanced by short wave energy triggering waves of surface low
pressure. Moisture feeding from the southwest can be seen on
satellite extending from the Pacific Ocean across Mexico, then
up the Mississippi and Ohio River valleys to the ILN area. Rain
developing as the moisture is transported over the boundary by a
deep layer of strong winds will continue today. After a brief
relative lull early this morning as an initial low center moves
east, coverage should increase in advance of the next low. With
1.1 inches PWAT contained in the moist plume, some locations
could see around an inch of rain.

Temperatures that remain way above normal early this morning
will exhibit a decreasing trend as the boundary sags southward
and winds shift to north. After all locations have highs in the
50s this morning, readings should retreat to the 30s and 40s
over the northern half of the FA this afternoon.

&&

.SHORT TERM /WEDNESDAY/...
As the boundary and low center continue to settle
southeastward, precip chances will show a decreasing trend
tonight into Wednesday. Rain is expected to be more persistent
tonight near the Ohio River closer to the boundary, while precip
should diminish to a light wintry mix farther north. Road
temperatures that are forecast to be well above freezing should
limit the affects of any light ice and snow accumulations. Will
mention minor threat in HWO for now, and later shifts may revise
this plan if more robust wintry accumulations are anticipated.
The next wave of low pressure will bring the likelihood for more
rain Wednesday afternoon, mainly in southern locations. A light
wintry mix may linger farther north.

After low temperatures range from the upper 20s north to mid 30
south tonight, readings are expected rebound only a bit on
Wednesday, with highs reaching the low 30s north up to the upper
30s south. There is lower than normal confidence in this
temperature forecast due to model variation and uncertainty with
respect to the frontal location.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY NIGHT THROUGH MONDAY/...
A large scale mid level trough will be located across the central
U.S. at the beginning of the long term period. Embedded s/wv energy
is forecast to move from the base of the trough to the western Great
Lakes Wednesday night into Thursday. This energy, associated with
developing upper divergence from an level jet, will perturb a wave
of low pressure along old frontal boundary. This wave will move
northeast through our region Thursday morning. Strong moist ascent
associated with a low level jet will spread widespread pcpn
northeast into the region Wednesday night. Warm air aloft will be
quickly pushed northward. This will pose a ptype issue for parts of
the area as temperatures will linger near or just below freezing
until warmer air at the surface arrives Thursday morning. Given
various solutions of low strength and tracks, will continue to use
an NBM approach for surface temperatures and thermal fields aloft.
At this time, the transition zone for mixed pcpn is slated for the
Interstate 70 corridor and points north. Some snow/sleet may fall
briefly across the far north at onset, but for the most part pcpn
will be freezing rain. Snow/sleet accumulations will be less than an
inch, while ice accumulations will range from a few hundredths to
around a tenth of an inch. The remainder of the region will have
rain. Temperatures by sunrise will have warmed to near freezing
across the far northwest to near 50 across the far southeast. On
Thursday, as the s/wv moves northeast, the low pressure system will
also move northeast. Pcpn will taper off in its wake and we may
actually see a "dry slot" occur over much of the area during the
morning. Temperatures will warm some in the east while they remain
steady or slowly fall in the west during the day. Models continue to
advertise another s/wv moving into the base of the trough which will
move northeast across the mid/upper Ohio Valley Thursday night. This
may bring the likelihood of pcpn back to our far southeast zones
with just of chance elsewhere. By this time, ptype will be rain/snow
with the ptype becoming all snow by Friday morning as temperatures
settle into the mid 20s to the lower 30s. Right snow, snow
accumulations will range from near an inch southeast to a few tenths
elsewhere.

The large scale mid level trough will have settled across the Great
Lakes and Ohio Valley on Friday. It will be cloudy and seasonably
cold with a chance of rain and/or snow lingering through the day.
Highs will range from the lower to mid 30s.

We will likely see a reprieve in pcpn chances Friday night as a weak
surface ridge moves east through the region. However, clouds will
remain in the CAA pattern. Lows will range from the lower 20s north
to the upper 20s south.

For Saturday into Saturday night, the large scale mid level trough
will traverse east. However, another s/wv in the developing zonal
flow to the west is expected to move east through the Tennessee and
Ohio Valleys. Will continue with a low chance of rain/snow across
the south/southeast as this location may be clipped by the weather
feature. Highs will range from the mid 30s to the lower 40s. Lows
will range from the mid 20s to near 30.

It still appears that surface high pressure will build back into the
region for Sunday/Sunday night. Models are having timing and
strength issues on the next weather system for Monday. Dry
conditions are slated for the Sunday/Sunday night time frame. Have
kept low chance PoPs for Monday. Temperatures will be near or
slightly above seasonal normals for early February.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z TUESDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
Light rain continues to spread across the area this afternoon
with most TAF sites now observing IFR ceilings. This is expected
to persist into the late afternoon and early evening hours
before a lull in precipitation arrives. As the cold front moves
southward, a switch in wind direction from southwest to north-
northeast is anticipated from 18-20Z.

For the overnight,forecast soundings suggest an period of lower
RHs advecting in from the north, allowing ceilings to gradually
rise to VFR during the overnight and into Wednesday morning,
especially for northern TAF sites. Across the south, closer
proximity to the front may allow for stubborn MVFR ceilings to
persist through the forecast period. Could still see some
scattered showers and even isolated freezing rain/drizzle but
drier low level should limit the coverage of drizzle. Overall
impacts are expected to be low so FZRA/FZDZ not included with
this forecast package.

Introduced -RA for CVG starting late Wednesday afternoon as a
secondary low pressure wave moves north into the Ohio Valley.
While still 36 hours or more away, there is the potential for
freezing rain across the western TAF sites and this may be noted
in later forecast packages.


OUTLOOK...MVFR/IFR ceilings and visibilities likely at times through
Thursday night.

&&

.ILN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
OH...None.
KY...None.
IN...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Coniglio
NEAR TERM...McGinnis
SHORT TERM...Coniglio
LONG TERM...Hickman
AVIATION...Coniglio