000
FXUS64 KFWD 051200 AAA
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
600 AM CST Wed Feb 5 2020


.SHORT TERM... /NEW/
/Morning Update/

No changes are required to the ongoing headlines, therefore the
Winter Storm Warning and Winter Weather Advisory have been
continued.

  Areas within the Winter Storm Warning (WSW)...
We have received many reports within the warned area of ice
accumulating on elevated surfaces as well as pockets of heavy
sleet and snowfall. Areas that have received the heavier sleet and
snow have sleet and snow covered roadways, particularly in areas
across northern Stephens...eastern Young...and Jack County. This
band of heavier sleet and snow is moving north and will be moving
into Montague County around 6 AM. Lingering light sleet and snow
is expected to continue within the WSW through the early morning,
with a lull in precip activity in the late morning hours. Another
band of sleet/snow should then move into and through the area this
afternoon, bringing an additional 1" or so of snow/sleet to the
areas within the WSW. All precip should come to an end by the
evening, however, continued freezing temperatures overnight will
allow for surfaces to remain iced through the night. Please remember
that roads that look wet may be covered in ice!

 Areas within the Winter Weather Advisory (and the Metroplex)...
Most of the surface temperatures across the region have remained
above freezing through much of the night with only passing light
rain showers. The 12Z RAOB sounding indicated a healthy warm layer
aloft (6.8C @ 800mb) over northern Fort Worth. Mesoanalysis
indicates this warm layer is more stout further west, and
substantially decreases further east. This has allowed most of the
wintry precip to remain west of the I-35 corridor this morning.
This transition zone (between the large warm nose and the shallow
one) will translate east through the day, allowing the wintry
precip to slowly move east through the morning. As this occurs, we
expect pockets of sleet and freezing rain to move into the I-35
corridor over the next couple hours.

Across the Metroplex...there is a shallow layer of sub-freezing
air above the surface just underneath the cloud base. As scattered
rain continues, evaporative cooling will work to moisten this
layer and wet bulb the sounding just above the surface. This will
then allow for pockets of sleet to start reaching the ground in
any convective shower that moves through. There has been a marked
uptick in these showers over the past hour or so, and will continue
to move through the region through the mid morning. A majority of
the sleet will remain west of I-35W, however, isolated non
accumulating sleet is possible across the remainder of the
Metroplex this morning. All sleet in the Metroplex should come to
an end by the mid to late morning.

For additional information regarding this system, see the previous
discussion below:

Previous Discussion: /Issued 155 AM CST Wed Feb 5 2020/
/Through Wednesday Night/

 -- Ongoing and Anticipated Winter Weather Impacts:
A Winter Storm is starting to unfold across the area this evening,
with reports of freezing rain, sleet, and snow coming in across
much of the area within the Winter Storm Warning. A cold rain has
been ongoing for several hours and given the gusty north winds and
falling temperatures into the low 30s...many of the bridges,
overpasses, and even surface roads should begin slushing and/or
icing over within the Winter Storm Warning area, particularly as a
transition to predominantly frozen precipitation ensues over the
next few hours. There are a few convective elements embedded in
this band, which are producing quick bursts of accumulating sleet.
Many of the reports of this thus far have been just outside of our
forecast area--Archer County for one--but as this band shifts east
we can expect these conditions within the Winter Storm Warning.
This band is expected to move into our forecast area beginning
around 1-2 AM and slowly move east through the early morning
hours...eventually weakening in intensity after 8-9 AM. This will
give several hours of wintry mix across the Winter Storm Warning
this morning. Motorists are urged to use extreme caution if
traveling tonight and tomorrow morning, and remember that if the
road looks wet...it could very well be iced over. The Winter Storm
Warning was continued, but may have to be extended into Wise and
Parker Counties if the cold air filters further south and east
than expected.

As for the area within the Winter Weather Advisory...including the
I-35, I-20 corridors and the western parts of the Metroplex, it
appears the worst conditions should remain west of this area.
Light rain should begin in the area around after 2-3 AM with
heavier rain starting around daybreak. A few bursts of
accumulating sleet are possible within this timeframe, but any
accumulation should remain on the light side and mostly confined
to bridges and overpasses, as well as grassy surfaces. The
eastern half of the Metroplex appears to be spared from this event
and is forecast to receive only cold rain.

After the primary line of enhanced precip moves north of the
area, lingering very light rain could persist across the area
through much of the afternoon. The exception to this is across
the extreme western counties where an enhanced band of snow is
possible in the early afternoon hours. If this develops, an
additional 0.5" of snow is possible.

Overnight across Central Texas...one last push of light sleet/snow
is possible, however, light precip rates and slightly warmer
temperatures should keep accumulations to a trace on grassy areas.

 -- Meteorological Details:
This area of precip is largely due to a passing shortwave trough
moving over the shallow, cold airmass left in the wake of
yesterday`s cold front. As this shortwave moves through,
frontogenesis is being enhanced in the low levels, thus increasing
the isentropic ascent overtop of the cold airmass. These factors
are combining to enhance the precip, and given the near/sub
freezing temperatures west of I-35 and north of I-20, wintry mix
is the predominate precip type. A conditionally unstable airmass
aloft is allowing for a few convective elements to develop...which
are producing the bursts of accumulating sleet. The coldest temps
aloft are confined to an area west and north of the H850 frontal
surface...currently aligned along a line from Goldthwaite to Fort
Worth to Sherman. To to the west of this line, a mix of rain,
freezing rain, and sleet is ongoing. Another area of tight thermal
packing (secondary cold push) is further north, currently aligned
along a line from OKC to Wichita Falls, where all snow is ongoing.
This secondary cold push will drive south through the morning,
eventually overtaking the entire forecast area by the late
afternoon and evening. Once this occurs, most of the wintry precip
will have ceased, with the one exception to this being across
Central Texas tonight...when the primary trough axis finally
swings through the area. The lack of any sufficient low level
forcing should help keep the precip rates on the low side,
therefore no impacts are expected.

Temperatures will remain cold through the day as insolation is
inhibited by cloud cover and CAA continues. Most of the area will
struggle to warm even 5 degrees over the course of the day
today...meaning the overnight low this morning will be remarkably
close to the afternoon high today. Some breaks in the cloud cover
will begin developing Wednesday night as strong isentropic
descent takes over the region. This, combined, with continued CAA
will keep/drop the entire forecast area`s Thursday morning lows
below freezing.

Bonnette

&&

.LONG TERM... /Issued 311 AM CST Wed Feb 5 2020/
/Late Week Through Early Next Week/

The deep mid level trough responsible for our first significant
winter weather in quite a while will be passing east across the
region Thursday. Large scale subsidence in wake of this feature
and dry northwest flow aloft will bring sunshine back to the area.
These transition days such as this will lend to a slow warm up,
but with the cool surface airmass across the area, especially
those that see significant sleet/snow accumulations today, that
warm up will be minimal. I did lean toward colder highs in the 30s
where that most likely occurs across our northwest counties, as
well as colder temperatures moving into Thursday night where a
lean toward the colder NAM12 model seemed appropriate over just
using straight model blend temperatures. The cyclonic flow
overhead dampens significant Friday and goes near zonal by
Saturday. A continued moderation of the airmass and warming of
surface temperatures should melt whatever is left from our first
winter storm across the northwest counties. Each morning will
still see a chilly start in the 30s, with a few readings in the
lower 40s by Saturday morning as a secondary push of dry Canadian
air arrives into the area. That said, highs both days will recover
into the 50s and 60s with plentiful sunshine.

For the latter half of the weekend into next week, we`ll begin to
transition into a warm advection pattern with modified moisture
returning northward with richer dew points remaining holding off
until later Monday and into the middle of next week. Will begin
to see nocturnal stratus surges, however, beginning next Monday as
a deep mid level low organizes and drops southward down the
California and Northwest Mexico Coasts. Medium range deterministic
models (GFS, European, and Canadian) are in rare agreement this
far and fairly close to their ensemble brethren. Look for North
and Central Texas to be under an unsettled southwest flow aloft
regime with periodic impulses bringing increasing rain chances
each day through the middle of next week. Monday night and Tuesday
will still the richer dew points remaining near the Texas Coast
into Southeast Texas. However, steepening lapse rates above what
will likely be an evolving elevated mixed layer (EML or capping
inversion aloft), I cannot rule out a few embedded and elevated
thunderstorms, especially across our Central and East Texas
counties.

No severe weather is anticipated at this time, though better
convective chances look to arrive around mid week as the cut-off
upper low over the Southwest U.S. and Northwest Mexico opens up
and is kicked eastward by yet more strong energy dropping
southward across the Great Basin states of the Western U.S. Again,
this is far out and I would not be surprised if these solutions
are on the fast side with energy dropping across southern
latitudes, so expect forecast adjustments as we move into the
coming weekend into early next week.

05/

&&

.AVIATION... /NEW/
/12Z TAFs/

Concerns: MVFR/IFR ceilings, potential wintry precipitation this
morning.

A blanket of post frontal MVFR ceilings are covering all of North
and Central Texas this morning. An area of freezing rain mixed
with sleet and snow is to the west of D10.

Temperatures should remain too warm to support any wintry precip
at the Metroplex Terminals until after 13Z through around 15-16Z
when some ice pellets could mix in with the rain. This will coincide
with a band of heavier rain and IFR ceilings. The area of predominate
rain should move north and east of the terminals in the mid to
late morning hours, however, some lingering light rain is
possible through the entire afternoon. Little to no sleet
accumulation is expected on untreated surfaces...but...gusty north
winds and temperatures close to freezing could lead to icing on
untreated metal surfaces.

High end IFR to low end MVFR ceilings should linger around through
much of the afternoon, eventually lifting to predominate MVFR by
late afternoon (after 20-22Z) when any lingering light precip
will also come to an end. A gradual improvement can be expected
through the overnight hours, eventually becoming VFR by daybreak
tomorrow. A north wind will continue through the valid TAF period.

Bonnette

&&


.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    36  29  45  33  62 /  90  20   0   0   0
Waco                39  29  49  31  68 /  60  20   0   0   0
Paris               39  28  41  30  55 /  90  20   0   0   0
Denton              35  26  44  30  60 / 100  30   0   0   0
McKinney            37  29  43  31  59 /  90  20   0   0   0
Dallas              37  30  46  34  64 /  90  20   0   0   0
Terrell             40  30  45  31  62 /  80  20   0   0   0
Corsicana           41  30  47  33  64 /  70  20   0   0   0
Temple              41  29  51  31  69 /  50  20   0   0   0
Mineral Wells       32  25  43  30  59 / 100  30   0   0   0

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Winter Weather Advisory until 6 PM CST this evening for TXZ092-
093-102-103-117-118-130>132-141>143.

Winter Storm Warning until 6 PM CST this evening for TXZ091-100-
101-115-116-129.

&&

$$

06/05